The next topic we're gonna discuss is
honestly one of my favorite in TypeScript
and it's this chapter and the next one.
So we're gonna start with top and
bottom types,
which are types they can hold anything and
types they can hold nothing.
And then type guards and narrowing.
So we saw a little bit about type
guards already, like type of,
instance of, but we're gonna learn
how to write our own type guards.
So the first thing I want
us to talk a little bit
about is thinking about types in
terms of what is called set theory.
And this might sound a little bit scary
cuz set theory gets very complicated.
But I just want you to think
of it from the simple idea
that we can think about types
as defining a set of values
that a variable or
a function argument might be.
So if we were to say that x is of type
boolean, what we're really saying is,
you may select anything from the following
set of values, true or false.
It can be one of those two things and
the set describes all allowed
things that x could be.
That's as far as we need
to go with set theory.
So let's think about y being a number.
So we could use what's
called set builder notation.
Hopefully, this is human readable enough.
But we could say there exists
a thing y such that y is any number.
And if we imagine the same kind of
concept is dealing with a boolean,
which only has two possibilities, y you
could think of as having a similar set.
But within that set is any number that's
allowable in the world of JavaScript.
So just a couple more examples
to sort of hit this point home.
Here is a union type that could
be one of three specific numbers.
So there's the set of
things that it could be.
Null, actually is its own type, at least
with strict null checks turned on,
which you should make sure
that remains turned on.
But that's one thing that that could be.
And here's an optional variable or
an optional property on some
object type that could be exactly the
string pineapple or it could be undefined.
Hopefully making sense so far.
So type just describes
a set of things that you
could find in the variable
that type describes.
Great, so let's talk about top types.
Top types are types to
describe anything and
we've already seen one of these, any.
So the set of things that any could be
it's any value allowable in JavaScript.
It could be a function, a number,
a string, a big int, a symbol,
null could be absolutely anything,
right, anything allowed in JavaScript.
And that's what makes it a top type.
It's the most general most flexible
thing that exists in this type system.
There's another top type called unknown.
So we're gonna talk about any first and
then we can go and look at unknown.
Obviously, any is quite flexible.
You can just think of it as playing by
the same rules as regular JavaScript.
Obviously, there are risks
around using any.
This is clearly at runtime going to be
a number, but I'm reaching into it as
if it's got many, many nested things and
they're not going to be there.
This will result in a runtime error.
Now I got this question earlier,
is it wrong to use any?
Is there any time where it's
the appropriate thing to do?
And my answer is yes, there are times
when it's absolutely appropriate.
A good example is console.log.
If we look at the type of console.log,
it has a rest parameter here.
So it takes any number of arguments
you like, each of which is an any.
This is appropriate because console.log
can log just about anything to
the console.
There's no reason to impose
additional constraints here.
Any describes accurately what
you should be doing here.
So it's the absolute right thing to use.
This is not something that
should be tightened up.
This is correct.
All right, let's look at unknown.
Just as with any,
you can see that I can put a number in it,
a string, document, a function like
set timeout, seems a lot like any.
But here's the key difference.
Unknown can't be used unless
you narrow it, right?
Unless you use a type guard
with it to check it out,
to make sure that it's acceptable for use.
So it's almost like it comes with
a warning label that says, you must verify
that this is what you think it is before
you go ahead and do something with it.
So in this case, you can see, yeah,
we can put any value into it that we like,
but we can't reach in and
start accessing it directly.
We must do something like this.
So you see my unknown, right at the time
that we're checking it before we
established that it could be a string,
it's an unknown.
And then down here, it's a string.
So we're free to use it as a string.
And then here's another
condition where it's an unknown.
But as soon as we make it into this
code block, hey, it's a number, and
we're free to use it as a number.
So it's as flexible as any in terms
of its ability to hold things,
but it places an extra responsibility
on whoever uses this value to
kind of check it out first
with the type guard.
So those are the two top types.
So practical uses for a top types.
One key place where you will
make heavy use of this is if
you convert a project from
JavaScript to TypeScript.
I do not advise that you
go straight from untyped or
dynamically typed JavaScript code and
then try in one big pass to
convert everything perfectly,
to have really strong,
I just used the strong word to
describe types, shouldn't do that.
To make a very specific well
articulated constraints with types and
just try to convert the whole thing in one
big code triage, that's dangerous, right?
Your odds are you're gonna break
something cuz it's just a lot
of potential to change behavior
while you're doing that.
It's common to define some
reasonable types where it's easy,
where it makes sense, and to leave a lot
of anys in there, and to sort of clean
those up in successive passes as you sort
of tighten things up, tighten things up.
So any is really useful for sort of
work in progress mid conversion states.
And it's also useful where you frankly
just don't have any idea what's going on.
Like you have no compile time
ability to verify things.
An example would be you just
received a fetch response and
you decoded it from JSON.
And you might think you know what
it is based on the endpoint, but
can you really be sure?
What if that API goes down and
it starts sending you error messages?
You might wanna verify that.
That might be a great use for unknown,
values received at runtime
from your data layer.
This works really well with
discriminated unions by the way.
Remember where we had that tuple
where there was the success and
there was the error.
So maybe you receive an API response and
on every API response,
there's a little key where if
you see that property there,
that's a strong signal that you know
what the rest of the object looks like.
So you can receive it as an unknown,
check for the presence of the key.
Okay, now we know what it is and
you have a nice type for that thing.
It's a great thing to use for data layers.